# How to design a SLICES-RI blueprint?

This document aims to provide recommandations on how to design a SLICES-RI
blueprint and its reference implementation.

A blueprint is based on the concept of "thought experiments" (a type of
experiment that Schrödinger considered impossible to realize -The Photon box-). 
They relates to the main scientific questions that a research community is willing to address using SLICES.
Much beyond its physical infrastructure, SLICES assets are the formulation of the thought experiments and its ability to support 
the full research life cycle, including FAIR[[^fair]] data and reproducibility.

Every blueprint is discussed with its relevant community, documented and built
iteratively[[^1]]. In each cycle, we pick up the appropriate actors to review
and validate the advances made so far and check their adequacy with the
baseline. Each iteration is used to refine the definition of the blueprint.

Every blueprint must support the full research cycles. At the level of the
blueprint, the experimental research cycle is abstracted in 3 phases [[^pos]].

1. **Setup phase:** allocate resources and prepare the software/hardware
environment to support the experimental requirements. Each experiment must be independent of the other experiments (past, current, or future). 
2. **Measurement/experiment phase:** orchestrate experiments and measurements
in order to control the entire life-cycle and collevt its outcomes. In the meanwhile,
operational parameters are collected and stored.
3. **Evaluation phase:** collected results are processed and stored according to the FAIR principles.
Collected datasets (experimental + operational data) and related meta-data are
documented and published in a format easily readable by researchers.

## Design principles

Blueprints must be designed in a modular way such that one can either deploy it
fully or only partially.

Blueprints are built in increasing complexity, described step-by-step and
seconded by an open source reference implementation, that can be used as a
baseline and a benchmark for their supported type of thought experiments:

* for the SLICES community to build the SLICES-RI facility.
* for researchers to exercise their experimental research;

Blueprints are inherently reproducible and their entire experiment cycle must
be compatible with the pos framework [[^pos]], adopted by SLICES for reproducibility purposes.

All data and metadata generated by a blueprint experiment must be published,
and respect the FAIR principle [[^fair]]. Published data and meta-data can be
subject to policy enforcement.

The documentation and reference implementation must be written in a way that
it can be learned and efficiently exploited and used by the SLICES-RI LLM [[^llm]].
The later acts as a mediator between the experimenter and the SLICES-RI facility.

Each blueprint goes along with an open source reference implementation that
offers the possibility to the readers to exercise the entire blueprint in the SLICES-RI infrastructure, and, to some extent, to adopt it in their own
environment. To favour the adoption by a wide audience, standard automation
tools (such as Ansible) are strongly recommended instead of home-made solutions.

As blueprints are regularly revised, their reference implementation can undergo
important revision.

## Requirements

The full experiment cycle must be automated in a reproducible way using pos 
framework [[^pos]]. Other alternatives are possible as long as at least pos is
supported.

All data and metadata must be managed by the SLICES-RI MRS (Metadata Registry System) and its associated DMI (Data Management Infrastructure).
Published data and meta-data can be subject to policy enforcement.

Every blueprint must be deployable on the SLICES-RI infrastructure. Access to
infrastructure must conform to the SLICES-RI access policies. So does the
accounting.  The SLICES-RI infrastructure is built on various digital components (compute, storage, network), being enriched and updated over time.

Authentication and authorization to the blueprint deployment in the SLICES-RI
infrastructure must be via the SLICES portal.

The documentation of the blueprint is open source and must feed the SLICES-RI
LLM in order to be integrated in the SLICES-RI chatbot.

The documentation must be integrated on the SLICES-RI documentation portal
(i.e., rendered and published directly by the portal documentation rendering
pipeline).

The blueprint provides a fully open source reference implementation that is made
publicly accessible and free of charges directly from the SLICES-RI portal. The
documentation of the reference implementation must be self contained in order
for the LLM to be fed adequately.

For reproducibility purposes, the different versions of the implementation must
be clearly identified (e.g., git tags, releases): newer version cannot hide
older versions.

When using a SLICES BluePrint, please reference their source.

## Blueprint documentation structure

We present below the typical documentation structure for a blueprint with
*i* components.

> * Scientific challenge and objectives
> * Methodology
> * Component *i*
>   * Definition
>   * Requirements
>     * Software
>     * Hardware
>   * Expected generated data and meta-data
> * Reference implementation
>   * link to the reference implementation with documentation on how to exercise
       the blueprint
> * Contacts
> * Contributors
> * References

## References

[^fair]: COMMISSION, E., 2022. Guidelines on FAIR Data Management in Horizon 2020.[Sl], 2016.

[^1]:  https://www.qrpinternational.fr/blog/faq/blueprint-quest-ce-que-cest/, accessed December 12, 2023.

[^pos]: Gallenmüller, S., Scholz, D., Stubbe, H. and Carle, G., 2021, December. The pos framework: A methodology and toolchain for reproducible network experiments. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies (pp. 259-266).

[^llm]: Kefalas, D., Christakis, S., Fdida, S., Makris, N., Syrigos I., Passas, V. and Korakis, T. slAIces: an LLM Chatbot for Simplifying
Experiments with the SLICES-RI. In 2024 IFIP Networking Conference (IFIP Networking)
